>>> ON THIS EDITION FOR SUNDAY
OCTOBER 13th, BACK AND FORTH AND
BACK AGAIN
THE BUDGET BATTLE IN WASHINGTO
CONTINUES.
MORE AMERICANS THAN EVER BEFOR
NOW FAVOR THE CREATION OF
THIRD MAJOR POLITICAL PARTY.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT
HELPING THOSE MOST AT RISK O
DYING FROM PREGNANCY RELATED
COMPLICATIONS.
>> WE DON'T WORK FOR THE
HOSPITAL
WE DON'T WORK FOR THE BIRTHING
CENTER
WE WORK FOR IT THE WOMAN
>> NEXT ON PBS "NEWS HOU
WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISH WNET STUDIOS A
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK
>>> GOOD EVENING
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
SENATE MAJORITY LEADER HARRY
REID AND SENATE MINORITY LEADE
MITCH McCONNELL SPOKE AGAI
TODAY IN THE LATEST EFFORTS TO
AVERT A U.S. GOVERNMENT DEFAULT,
AN EVENT SOME WARN COULD
SERIOUSLY DAMAGE THE WORLD WHICH
ECONOM
THE DEADLINE TO INCREASE THE
DEBT CEILING IS NOW LITTLE MOR
THAN 71 HOURS AWAY
TODAY THE HEAD OF TH
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUN
ISSUED A NEW WARNING ABOUT THE
DANGERS OF A DEFAULT
>> IF THERE'S THAT DEGREE OF
DISRUPTION, THAT LACK OF
CERTAINTY, THAT LACK OF TRUST IN
THE U.S. SIGNATURE, IT WOULD
MEAN MASSIVE DISRUPTION TH
WORLD OVER
WE WOULD BE AT RISK OF TIPPING
YET AGAIN INTO RECESSION
>> NEGOTIATIONS BETWEE
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND HOUS
REPUBLICANS FALTERED YESTERDAY
SO THE TWO SENATE LEADERS BEGA
TALKS TO TRY TO END THE NO
13-DAY GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN AND
TO AGREE ON A PLAN TO RAISE TH
DEBT CEILING
IN WASHINGTON TODAY,
DEMONSTRATORS GATHERED T
PROTEST THE CLOSING OF THE WORLD
WAR II MEMORIAL BECAUSE OF THE
SHUTDOWN
A NUMBER OF THEM THEN MARCHED TO
THE WHITE HOUSE.
THE SENATE WAS BACK IN SESSION
TODAY, BUT MANY HOUSE MEMBER
WENT HOME YESTERDAY.
THE HOUSE IS NOT EXPECTED TO
RESUME BUSINESS BEFORE TOMORRO
NIGHT.
FOR MORE ON WHAT COULD BE NEXT
WE'RE JOINED BY OUR POLITICA
EDITOR
LET'S START WITH THAT PROTEST WE
JUST MENTIONED A LITTLE WHIL
AGO.
THERE WAS A PICTURE IN "TH
WASHINGTON POST.
WHY IS THIS PROTEST GETTIN
TRACTION
>> YOU'RE SEEING A LOT O
CONSERVATIVES REALLY PUSH TH
IDEA THAT BLAMING PRESIDEN
OBAMA FOR SHUTTING DOWN THIS
OPEN-AIR MEMORIAL THAT REALL
DOESN'T NECESSARILY NEED PEOPL
AND STAFF TO RUN IT.
IT'S SOMETHING YOU SEE TOURIST
VISIT ALL THE TIME I
IT'S BECOME THIS FLASH POINT O
THE RIGHT SAYING THAT THEY'V
BEEN BLOCKED
SO THAT'S WHY YOU'RE SEEING TH
CONSERVATIVES FLOCK TO THAT.
IT'S GENERATING A LOT OF ENERG
AMONG HOUSE REPUBLICANS IN
PARTICULAR WHO SAY PERHAPS THOSE
PICTURES, PEOPLE SEE THE CROWDS,
THEY'RE GOING TO SAY, WELL
MAYBE WE'RE ON THE HOUSE
REPUBLICAN SIDE ON THIS ISSUE.
I DON'T KNOW THAT'S ACTUALLY
GOING TO MOVE THE ISSUE WHEN
YOU'RE HAVING STILL A SHUT DOW
GOVERNMENT
IT'S STILL SOMETHING GENERATIN
A LOT OF ATTENTION
>> OKAY.
IN REGARDS TO THE NEGOTIATIONS
OR THE CONVERSATIONS, SOMEON
MISSING FROM THIS IS VIC
PRESIDENT BIDEN.
IT WAS JUST LAST DECEMBER THAT
HE WAS INSTRUMENTAL IN
ORCHESTRATING A DEAL WITH MITC
McCONNELL.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
SO VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN WAS
SENATOR, SERVED FOR DECADES,
KNOWS A LOT OF THE PLAYERS I
THE SENATE VERY WELL AND IS ABLE
TO COME TOGETHER AND BRIDG
DEALS.
BUT SENATE DEMOCRATS ARE WARY OF
THIS, BOTH FROM PRESIDENT OBAM
AND VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN, WARY
THAT WHATEVER DEAL ENDS UP
GETTING CRAFTED IS GOING TO HAVE
MORE CONCESSIONS TO REPUBLICAN
THAN SHOULD HAPPEN
SO THAT'S WHERE YOU'RE SEEIN
THE PRESSURE
YOU'RE SEEING BIDEN PUSHED OUT
OF THE WAY JUST A LITTLE BIT
HE'S STILL BEEN AT THE TABLE
WHEN THE PRESIDENT HOSTED AL
FOUR CAUCUSES OVER THE LAS
WEEK
BUT HE'S NOT GOING UP TO CAPITOL
HILL TO HAVE THESE CLOSED DOOR
NEGOTIATIONS LIKE HE DID LAS
YEAR
YOU'RE WONDERING, YOU KNOW
MAYBE THAT'S ONE OF THE REASON
WHY THEY'RE NOT COMING UP WITH A
DEAL
>> OKAY.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE'V
HEARD RAND PAUL SAY THIS MORNING
ON THE SUNDAY TALK SHOWS IS THIS
SEQUESTER LEVEL, SAYING, HEY, IF
YOU WANT THESE CUTS, SENAT
REPUBLICANS ARE NOT GOING TO
VOTE ON ANY KIND OF REOPENING OF
THE GOVERNMENT UNTIL THE
SEQUESTER CUTS ARE BASICALLY
KEPT IN PLACE.
WHY IS THIS SUCH AN IMPORTAN
ISSUE FOR HIM?
>> WELL, THAT'S ACTUALLY
IMPORTANT TO POINT OUT, THAT THE
CONTINUING RESOLUTION, THE
BUDGET AGREEMENTS THAT THEY HA
IN PLACE THAT WOULD ONLY FUN
THE GOVERNMENT, BY THE WAY
THROUGH A FEW EXTRA WEEKS.
IT'S NOT LIKE A LONG-TERM OR
ONE-YEAR PLAN, IT DOES HAVE TH
SEQUESTER CUTS IN PLACE.
THESE ARE REDUCED LEVELS O
FUNDING WE'VE ALREADY SEEN I
PLACE FOR A YEAR, AND IT
CONTINUES THOSE ALONG.
WHAT RAND PAUL IS SAYING IS THAT
HE WANTS TO SEE EVEN MORE CUTS
AND WANTS TO ENSURE THOSE CUTS
BECOME PERMANENT
IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT TO POINT OUT
THAT THE WHOLE POINT OF TH
SEQUESTER WAS IT WOULD BE SO
PAINFUL IF IMPLEMENTED THAT IT
WOULDN'T HAPPEN.
IT'S BEEN IN PLACE FOR A YEAR.
>> WE ALSO HEAR A DIFFERENT DATE
ON LIFTING THE DEBT CEILING.
WHAT ARE THE POLITICS BEHIND IT?
WHY DOES ONE SIDE WANT IT TO B
AS EARLY AS THANKSGIVING AND
ANOTHER SIDE SAY WHY DON'T W
KEEP IT OFF UNTIL THE END OF
>> WELL, THE MIDTERM ELECTIONS
HAVE A LOT TO DO WITH THAT
SENATE DEMOCRATS WOULD PREFE
THERE'S ONE VOTE AND THEN YO
DON'T HIT THE DEBT CEILING AGAIN
UNTIL AFTER THE MIDTERMS IN TH
FALL OF 2014
THERE ARE A LOT OF VULNERABL
SENATE DEMOCRATS WHO ARE FACIN
EITHER TOUGH CHALLENGES OR
POSSIBLE PROBLEMS WITH THEIR
RE-ELECTION CAMPAIGNS.
IT'S EASIER FOR THEM TO NOT HAVE
TO TAKE THIS VOTE AGAIN.
I DON'T ACTUALLY UNDERSTAND WH
ANYONE WOULD WANT TO TAKE THIS
VOTE MORE THAN ONCE OTHER THAN
THE FACT THAT THEY'RE TRYING T
GET SOME CONCESSIONS, BOTH SIDES
ARE TRYING TO GET CONCESSION
FROM THE OTHER SIDE, WHETHER
THAT'S SPENDING OR TAXES OR TH
PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE LAW.
ANY OF THOSE ITEMS
SO RIGHT NOW THE BIG STICKIN
POINT IS DOES THIS HAPPEN IN A
FEW WEEKS?
DOES IT HAPPEN IN JANUARY?
DOES IT HAPPEN IN A YEAR AND A
MONTH?
THAT REALLY MATTERS FOR TH
PEOPLE THAT ARE ON THE BALLOT.
>> AND WHAT ABOUT FOR TOMORROW
MORNING?
THERE'S STILL SOME CONCERN THA
THE STOCK MARKET OR FINANCIA
MARKETS COULD REACT ADVERSELY TO
THE LAST 24 HOURS, WHICH HAVEN'T
BEEN POSITIVE.
WE'VE ESSENTIALLY SEEN MEMBERS
OF CONGRESS GO ON TV AND SAY THE
TALKS ARE STALLED.
>> YEAH, ESPECIALLY BETWEEN TH
HOUSE AND THE WHITE HOUSE.
RIGHT NOW SENATE DEMOCRATS ARE
TAKING THE CHARGE.
THEY'RE TRYING TO GET AN
AGREEMENT WITH SENAT
REPUBLICANS.
WHAT HARRY REID HAS SAID IS HE
REALLY WANTS TO KEEP THOSE
CONVERSATIONS GOING AND HE'LL BE
SPEAKING WITH MITCH McCONNEL
RIGHT WHEN MARKETS OPEN ON
MONDAY
EVERYONE IS WATCHING VER
CAREFULLY.
THURSDAY IS COMING UP VERY
RAPIDLY.
THE WAY THAT PROCEDURE WORKS, IT
WILL TAKE A LITTLE BIT OF TIME
FOR WHATEVER DEAL THEY COME UP
WITH TO ACTUALLY PASS AND MAKE
IT TO PRESIDENT OBAMA'S DESK
SO THE CLOCK IS REALLY TICKING
A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE VERY NERVOUS
THIS COULD HAVE FAR-REACHING
CONSEQUENCES ON THE ECONOMY,
BOTH HERE IN THE UNITED STATES
AND INTERNATIONALLY.
>> ALL RIGHT
CHRISTINA, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS.
>>> AND NOW NEWS FROM THE MIDDLE
EAST
ISRAEL SAID IT HAS DISCOVERED
MILE-LONG CONCRETE TUNNE
EXTENDING INTO THAT COUNTRY FROM
THE GAZA STRIP
A TUNNEL ISRAELI OFFICIALS CLAIM
THAT HAMAS MILITANTS WER
PLANNING TO USE TO KIDNAP OR
KILL ISRAELIS.
IN RESPONSE, ISRAEL BLOCKE
DELIVERY OF CONSTRUCTION
MATERIALS INTO THE PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY.
>>> AT A CABINET MEETING TODAY
PRIME MINISTER BENJAMI
NETANYAHU CREDITED WHAT HE
CALLED ISRAEL'S AGGRESSIVE
POLICY AGAINST TERROR FO
LEADING TO THE QUIETEST YEAR I
A DECADE ALONG ISRAEL'S BORDER
WITH GAZA.
>>> FROM SYRIA TONIGHT WHERE
GUNMEN HAVE ABDUCTED SIX RED
CROSS WORKERS.
THE GROUP WAS TRAVELING IN A
CONVOY WHEN THE GUNMEN BLOCKED
THEIR PATH, OPENED FIRE, AND
SEIZED THEM.
THE AID WORKERS WERE RETURNING
FROM DAMASCUS.
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS REBELS ARE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE ABDUCTIONS
>>> AND STILL MORE VIOLENCE IN
IRAQ TODAY
A SERIES OF CAR BOMBINGS AT BU
STATIONS AND IN SHOPPING CENTERS
IN XI YIET AREAS OF THE COUNTR
LEFT AT LEAST 31 PEOPLE DEAD AND
DOZENS MORE WOUNDED.
THERE WERE BOMBINGS IN AT LEAS
EIGHT CITIES
MORE THAN 5,000 IRAQIS HAVE BEEN
KILLED IN SECTARIAN VIOLENCE
BETWEEN SUNNI AND SHIITE MUSLIMS
IN THE PAST SIX MONTHS
>>> INDIA HAS BEEN SPARED FROM A
POWERFUL CYCLONE TODAY
CLEANUP EFFORTS ARE UNDERWAY
AFTER FLOODING AND OTHER DAMAG
IN COASTAL REGIONS
CROP DAMAGES ARE ESTIMATED A
$300 MILLION
ONLY 14 PEOPLE WERE KILLED I
YESTERDAY'S STORM BECAUSE OF ITS
DECISION TO EVACUATE
APPROXIMATELY THREE-QUARTERS O
A MILLION PEOPLE
>>> ANOTHER POWERFUL STORM I
THE SAME VICINITY IN 1999 KILLED
AN ESTIMATED 10,000 PEOPLE
THERE WAS A TRAGEDY IN ANOTHER
PART OF INDIA TODAY.
AN ESTIMATED 89 PEOPLE
INCLUDING 30 CHILDREN, WER
KILLED IN A STAMPEDE AT A HIND
FESTIVAL
MANY OF THE VICTIMS WHO HAD BEEN
CROWDED ON TO A BRIDGE WER
CRUSHED TO DEATH, POSSIBLY AFTER
RUMORS SPREAD THAT THE BRIDG
WAS ABOUT TO COLLAPSE.
OTHERS DIED AFTER PANICKING AN
JUMPING INTO THE WATER BELOW
>>> FROM NORTH KOREA TONIGHT
PICTURES OF AN EMOTIONAL REUNION
BETWEEN AN IMPRITSZED AMERICAN
MISSIONARY AND HIS MOTHER.
KENNETH BAE IS HOSPITALIZED IN
PYONGYANG FROM COMPLICATIONS
RELATING TO DIABETES
HE'S SERVING A 15-YEAR SENTENC
AFTER ADMITTING HE CONDUCTED
RELIGIOUS SERVICES IN THAT
COUNTRY.
BAE'S MOTHER SAID HER SON HA
LOST A GREAT DEAL OF WEIGH
SINCE BEING IN PRISON.
>>> AND CONFIRMATION TODAY O
WHAT PUNDITS HAVE BEEN SAYIN
ALL ALONG, THAT THERE REALLY ARE
NO WINNERS WHEN IT COMES TO TH
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN.
WE'RE NOT TALKING ABOU
POLITICIANS.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THOS
PLAYING THE DISTRICT O
COLUMBIA'S LOTTERY
EVEN THOSE HOLDING WINNING
TICKETS WON'T GET PAID
AT LEAST NOT YET
THAT'S BECAUSE THE CITY DEPEND
ON CONGRESS TO FUND ITS BUDGET
NO WINNERS, INDEED
♪♪
>>> AND NOW TO OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT FEATURING ORIGINAL
IN-DEPTH REPORTS FROM AROUND THE
NATION AND WORLD
TONIGHT WE LOOK AT A PROGRAM
THAT AIMS TO ENSURE HEALTHIE
OUTCOMES FOR PREGNANT WOMEN AN
THEIR BABIES
FOR ALL THE MONEY THE UNITED
STATES SPENDS ON HEALTH CARE
THE RATION RANKS NOWHERE NEA
THE TOP OF THE LIST IN TERMS O
SAFE DELIVERIES.
THAT'S WHY THERE'S A GROWING
MOVEMENT TO GET MORE HELP FO
WOMEN ABOUT TO GIVE BIRTH,
ESPECIALLY THOSE LIVING IN POO
NEIGHBORHOODS.
OUR REPORT IS BY "NEWS HOUR"
CORRESPONDENT.
>> Reporter: THIS WOMAN IS A
RETIRED GRADE SCHOOLTEACHER.
BUT SHE'S STILL DISPENSING
PLENTY OF INFORMATION.
THESE DAYS TO PREGNANT WOMEN
>> THE MOST IMPORTANT THING IS
HEALTHY MOMMY, HEALTHY BABY.
>> Reporter: ON THIS DAY I
EARLY AUGUST, SHE WAS VISITING
JESSICA MARSHALL, THEN 7 1/2
MONTHING PREGNANT, AT HER HOME
IN BROOKLYN.
THEY DISCUSS ISSUES LIKE
PRENATAL HEALTH AND A BIRT
PLAN
>> IF YOU CAN RELAX AND GO INT
THIS, YOU'RE NOT SO AFRAID
YOU'RE NOT SO TENSE.
IF YOU'RE TIGHT AND TENSE AN
WORRIED, IT SLOWS IT DOWN.
>> Reporter: SHE ISN'T A DOCTO
OR MIDWIFE
SHE'S WHAT'S KNOWN AS A DOULA.
THAT'S ANCIENT GREEK FOR A WOMAN
WHO SERVES
DOULAS SUPPORT PREGNANT WOME
BEFORE, DURING, AND AFTE
CHILDBIRTH
>> BEING A FIRST-TIME MOTHER,
REALLY WANTED TO TAKE ADVANTAG
OF ALL THE INFORMATION THAT
COULD.
I KNOW THE DOULAS TYPICALLY AR
VERY SUPPORTIVE OF MOTHERS
BIRTH PLANS.
I WANTED A DOULA THAT WA
SUPPORTIVE OF ME HAVING
NATURAL BIRTH.
>> THE DOULA SERVES THE WOMAN.
WE DON'T WORK FOR THE HOSPITAL
WE DON'T WORK FOR THE BIRTHING
CENTER
WE DON'T WORK FOR THE MIDWIFE.
WE WORK FOR THE WOMAN.
>> Reporter: THE SERVICE I
PROVIDED FOR FREE BACKED BY TH
NEW YORK CITY'S DEPARTMENT O
HEALTH
IT'S CALLED THE BY MY SIDE BIRTH
SUPPORT PROGRAM.
IT'S AIMED AT WOMEN LIVING I
LOW-INCOME, LARGEL
AFRICAN-AMERICAN NEIGHBORHOODS
IN BROOKLYN WHERE THERE ARE HIGH
INFANT AND MATERNAL MORTALIT
RATES.
ACCORDING TO THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL'S LATEST
STATISTICS, NATIONWIDE BLACK
WOMEN ARE THREE TIMES MORE
LIKELY TO DIE OF PREGNANCY
RELATED COMPLICATIONS THAN WHITE
WOMEN.
IN NEW YORK CITY IT'S ALMOST
SEVEN TIMES HIGHER
AN AVERAGE OF 63 DEATHS PE
100,000 DEATHS FOR BLACK WOMEN
COMPARED TO 9 DEATHS PER 100,000
BIRTHS FOR WHITE WOMEN
WHY DO YOU THINK THERE ARE THESE
HIGH RATES OF MATERNAL
MORTALITY?
>> I THINK HEALTH CARE I
GENERAL IS NOT AS GOOD IN THIS
AREA AS IN OTHERS.
THE WOMEN HAVE A LOT O
PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS, WHETHER
IT'S HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE
ASTHMA, OBESITY, WHICH ALS
CONTRIBUTES.
THEY JUST MAY NOT BE IN AS GOO
HEALTH
>> Reporter: MARY POWELL THOMA
IS THE DIRECTOR OF THE BY MY
SIDE BIRTH SUPPORT PROGRAM
IT WAS ESTABLISHED THROUGH A
FEDERAL GRANT 3 1/2 YEARS AG
WHEN HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS
WANTED TO ADDRESS A TROUBLIN
TREND.
MANY WOMEN WERE SHOWING UP TOT
HOSPITAL ALONE WHEN THEY WER
READY TO DELIVER
SO FAR THIS PROGRAM HAS HELPED
MORE THAN 240 WOMEN GIVE BIRTH
>> IT BECAME CLEAR THAT IT WAS
REALLY HELPFUL TO HAVE A WOMAN
WHO WAS EXPERIENCED IN
CHILDBIRTH WHO COULD BE THERE TO
SUPPORT THE WOMAN.
>> BUT WHY A DOULA
WHY NOT CONCENTRATE ON GIVIN
THE WOMAN MORE SUPPORT THROUGH
HER DOCTOR
>> IN A LOT OF CASES, THE DOCTOR
COMES IN AT THE LAST MINUTE TO
DELIVER THE BABY OR MAYBE COME
IN A FEW TIMES TO CHECK ON THE
WOMAN BUT THEN GOES OFF TO D
OTHER THINGS
WE HAVE DOULAS WHO, YOU KNOW
ARRIVE IN THE MORNING AND THEY
MEET THE MORNING NURSE AND THE
THE NIGHT NURSE AND THEN THE
MORNING NURSE COMES BACK THE
NEXT DAY AND THE DOULA IS STIL
THERE.
>> TRADITIONALLY, WOMEN BIRT
WITH OTHER WOMEN
THE VILLAGE COMES AROUND WHEN
WOMAN'S LABORING
SHE HAS HER MOTHER, HE
GRANDMOTHER, HER SISTERS, HE
AUNTIES.
THEY ENCOURAGE HER
THEY LET HER KNOW SHE CAN DO IT.
THEY TELL HER STORIES.
THEY LAUGH TOGETHER.
THEY CRY WITH HER.
>> Reporter: BUT CRITICS
QUESTION WHETHER IT'
GOVERNMENT'S ROLE TO FINANCE
PROGRAMS LIKE THESE.
DOULA CARE ISN'T REGULATED AND
DOULAS AREN'T LICENSED
PROFESSIONALS.
ALTHOUGH CERTIFICATION I
AVAILABLE, IT ISN'T REQUIRED
THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF ON STA
TRIGSS AND GYNECOLOGISTS DOESN'T
TAKE A POSITION ON DOULA BUT
SAYS CONTINUING SUPPORT DURING
LABOR MAY BE BENEFICIAL FO
WOMEN.
>> THEY SHOULD WORK TOGETHER A
A TEAM AND THEY'RE PART OF THE
DELIVERY TEAM AND THE DELIVERY
EXPERIENCE
>> Reporter: DR. RAYMOND SANDLER
IS THE DIRECTOR OF LABOR AND
DELIVERY AT MT. SINAI HOSPITAL
IN NEW YORK.
HE'S A BIG SUPPORTER OF DOULAS
BUT SAYS IN SOME CASES THERE CAN
BE CHALLENGES.
>> THEY'RE NONMEDICAL AND SHOULD
STICK TO NONMEDICAL DECISION
MAKING
AT TIMES THERE IS SOME TENSION
BETWEEN THE DOULA AND TH
PHYSICIAN BECAUSE THE DOULA --
FOR INSTANCE, IF THE PHYSICIAN
WANTS TO DO CERTAI
INTERVENTIONS, THE DOULA MAY
FEEL IT'S NOT NECESSARY AN
INJECTS HERSELF INTO THE
DECISION MAKING PROCESS.
>> I THINK THERE ARE SOM
OBSTETRICIANS WHO FEEL THIS IS
AN EXTRA PERSON IN THE ROO
GETTING IN THE WAY
>> THERE'S DEFINITELY A RANGE OF
ATTITUDES.
I THINK GENERALLY AS THERE ARE
MORE AND MORE DOULAS IN
HOSPITAL, THE STAFF BECOMES MORE
COMFORTABLE.
IT'S ALSO, YOU KNOW, IMPORTANT
FOR THE DOULAS TO BE RESPONSIBLE
ABOUT THAT
>> Reporter: A MAIN SOURCE O
TENSION BETWEEN DOULAS AND
DOCTORS IS OVER THE USE OF
C-SECTIONS
WHILE THE WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION SAYS A C-SECTION IS
APPROPRIATE UP TO 15% OF THE
TIME, IN THE UNITED STATES
NEARLY 33% OF ALL DELIVERIES ARE
DONE BY C-SECTION.
MARY POWELL THOMAS POINTS TO A
RECENT RESEARCH BY A NONPROFIT
GROUP THAT STUDIES THE
EFFECTIVENESS OF HEALTH CARE
AFTER REVIEWING PREGNANC
SUPPORT TRIALS FROM 16
COUNTRIES, IT DETERMINED
CONTINUOUS SUPPORT IN LABOR,
INCLUDING THE PRESENCE OF
DOULA, REDUCES THE LIKELIHOOD OF
A C-SECTION BY AS MUCH AS 22%.
>> IF A WOMAN IS IN A SITUATIO
THAT IS SCARY AND A MEDICA
PROFESSIONAL GIVES HER A QUICK
MEDICALESE ANSWER, WE MIGHT AS
SHE NEED MORE INFORMATION.
>> Reporter: IT'S THE POWER OF
INFORMATION THAT JESSICA
MARSHALL SAYS SHE'S COUNTING O
IN ORDER TO HAVE A NATURAL
BIRTH.
>> I THINK SOME OF THE THING
THAT SURPRISE ME ARE WHAT HAVING
A LACK OF KNOWLEDGE, HOW THA
AFFECTS A MOTHER WHEN SHE GOES
TO GIVE BIRTH AND DELIVER AN
HOW THAT CAN PRODUCE RESULTS SHE
DIDN'T DESIRE SUCH AS
C-SECTION OR SOME OTHER HEALTH
COMPLICATIONS.
>> Reporter: DESPITE WHA
PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS BELIEVE ARE
THE BENEFITS OF DOULA PROGRAMS
AND DESPITE THE GROWIN
POPULARITY OF USING DOULAS
THERE'S STILL ONLY LIMITED
INSURANCE TO PAY FOR THEM.
OREGON AND MINNESOTA HAVE PASSED
LAWS ALLOWING MEDICAID TO PA
FOR DOULA CARE, BUT MOST WOMEN
PAY ANYWHERE FROM A FEW HUNDRE
TO A FEW THOUSAND DOLLARS OUT OF
POCKET
>> MANY PEOPLE SEE DOULAS AS A
LUXURY
SERVICES ARE NOT INCLUDED IN
INSURANCE.
HERE YOU ARE PROVIDING THI
LUXURY TO WOMEN IN LOW-INCOM
AREAS.
>> YES, WE ARE
AND IT'S GREAT
>> WHY
BECAUSE IT'S A PROVEN WAY TO
IMPROVE BIRTH OUTCOMES
THAT'S OUR MISSION
>>> WHICH COUNTRIES HAVE THE
BEST AND WORST SUPPORT SERVICE
FOR NEW MOTHERS?
VISIT NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG
>>> THE RESULTS OF A POL
RELEASED THIS WEEK GOT OUR
ATTENTION.
FOR THE PAST TEN YEARS, GALLUP
HAS ASKED, DO THE REPUBLICAN AND
DEMOCRATIC PARTIES DO AN
ADEQUATE JOB REPRESENTING TH
AMERICAN PEOPLE, OR DO THEY DO
SUCH A POOR JOB THAT A THIRD
MAJOR PARTY IS NEEDED?
THIS WEEK, THOSE SAYING THE TW
MAJOR PARTIES DID AN ADEQUAT
JOB HIT AN ALL-TIME LOW, AND THE
PERCENTAGE OF PEOPLE SAYING
THIRD PARTY IS NEEDED HIT AN
ALL-TIME HIGH.
FOR MORE, WE'RE JOINED FRO
WASHINGTON BY NATHAN GONZALEZ.
WHAT DO YOU MAKE OF THES
FINDINGS
>> WELL, I THINK THIS THIR
PARTY QUESTION IS JUST ANOTHER
WAY OF ASKING THE CONGRESSIONA
JOB APPROVAL QUESTION RIGHT NOW.
FOR A LARGE SEGMENT OF AMERICANS
WHO THINK THAT THERE'S TOO MUC
GRIDLOCK, THEY DON'T AGREE WIT
WHAT CONGRESS IS DOING, THEY'R
EXTREMELY OPEN TO ANOTHE
POSSIBILITY.
SO WHEN PROMPTED SAY, WELL
WOULD YOU WANT A THIRD PARTY
THEY'LL SAY, SURE, WE DON'T LIKE
WHAT REPUBLICANS OR DEMOCRAT
ARE DOING, SO LET'S LOOK FOR
ANOTHER WAY BEEN
>> IS THIS INDICATIVE OF WHY THE
TEA PARTY'S POPULARITY HAS
SUSTAINED ITSELF OVER TIME
>> WELL, I THINK THE TEA PARTY
IS A SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT ANIMAL
I THINK IT WOULD BE NATURAL TO
SAY, WELL, THE TEA PARTY IS IN
PLACE IN ORDER TO BECOME THE
NEXT REAL THIRD PARTY ACROSS THE
COUNTRY, BUT THE TEA PARTY HAS
NEVER REALLY SHOWN A DESIRE TO
BECOME THAT THIRD PARTY.
I THINK IT'S MORE OF A REFOR
MOVEMENT WITHIN THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY.
I THINK THE TEA PARTY KIND O
REVELS IN ITS DECENTRALIZATION
BUT IN ORDER TO BECOME, I THINK,
A LEGITIMATE ELECTORAL
THIRD-PARTY THREAT, YOU'D NEED
TO BE MUCH MORE ORGANIZED, HAV
MORE OF A CENTRAL LEADERSHIP I
ORDER TO WIN, YOU KNOW, RACES UP
AND DOWN THE BALLOT.
>> DESPITE THE GROWING SENTIMENT
FOR A THIRD PARTY, AREN'T THER
HUGE STRUCTURAL OBSTACLES TO
CREATING ONE
>> RIGHT
I THINK THERE ARE A NUMBER O
ISSUES
ONE ARE STRUCTURAL ISSUES FO
ANY POTENTIAL THIRD PARTY.
OUR SYSTEM IS, I THINK, BIASED
TOWARD REPUBLICANS AND
DEMOCRATS, TOWARD TWO PARTIES.
IF YOU'RE A THIRD PARTY, IN MOST
STATES IT IS MUCH MORE DIFFICULT
TO GAIN BALLOT ACCESS, JUST TO
BECOME A CHOICE, IT BECOMES MORE
DIFFICULT.
YOU EITHER NEED MORE SIGNATURE
AND YOU DON'T HAVE THAT PART
INFRASTRUCTURE IN PLACE TO
GATHER THOSE SIGNATURES.
I THINK IT'S ALSO STRUCTURALLY A
PROBLEM FOR A THIRD PARTY IN
RAISING MONEY.
YOU DON'T HAVE A NATURAL BASE TO
GO TO FROM ONE PARTY OR TH
OTHER.
BUT I ALMOST THINK MORE THAN THE
STRUCTURAL DISADVANTAGES FOR A
THIRD PARTY IS AN IDEOLOGICA
CHALLENGE.
THAT IS, I THINK WHAT THIS
QUESTION, THE OPENNESS TO
THIRD PARTY SHOWS IS A
DISSATISFACTION WITH REPUBLICANS
AND DEMOCRATS.
THESE PEOPLE KNOW WHAT THE
DON'T WANT BECAUSE THEY'RE
SEEING GRIDLOCK.
BUT WHEN YOU START TO AS
PEOPLE, OKAY, LET'S GET A THIR
PARTY, WHAT ARE WE FOR
THAT'S WHEN IT BECOMES MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT BECAUSE PEOPLE HAV
DIFFERENT IDEAS OF WHAT TH
SOLUTION IS, EVEN THOUGH THE
ALL DISAGREE ON THE PROBLEM.
I THINK THAT WOULD BE A MAJO
STRUGGLE FOR A THIRD PARTY T
REALLY COME UP OUT OF THIS
>> THERE HAVE BEEN SEVERAL
SERIOUS THIRD-PARTY CANDIDATES
OVER THE YEARS THAN FORMER
PRESIDENT THEODORE ROOSEVELT
GEORGE WALLACE WON 13.5% AND WON
FOUR STATES.
ROSS PEROT WON NEARLY 19% OF THE
VOTE IN 1992
IS THERE A SERIOUS THIRD-PARTY
CANDIDATE WHO COULD EMERGE B
>> I THINK EVERY SO MANY YEARS
THERE IS THAT CANDIDATE.
I THINK IN ORDER TO -- IT'
GOING TO HAVE TO BE MORE THA
THAT IN ORDER TO GET A THIRD
PARTY, A MAJOR THIRD PARTY
ACROSS THE COUNTRY
YOU HAVE TO HAVE SENAT
CANDIDATES, CANDIDATES FOR THE
U.S. HOUSE IN PLACE AND READ
TO, YOU KNOW, WIN SEATS.
THAT'S WHERE THE ELECTORAL POWER
IS GOING TO COME
SO RIGHT NOW, IN MOST CASES, YOU
SEE THIRD-PARTY CANDIDATES THA
CAN GET A SIGNIFICANT CHUNK OF
THE VOTE, MAYBE IN A
PRESIDENTIAL RACE, MAYBE WINNING
A GOVERNORSHIP OR TWO.
BUT IT'S GOING TO TAKE MORE THAN
THAT, MORE ORGANIZATION, I THINK
MORE MONEY TO -- IN ORDER TO
HAVE A MAJOR, WIDESPREAD CHANG
ACROSS THE COUNTRY
>> ALL RIGHT
NATHAN GONZALEZ, THANKS SO MUC
FOR YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU
♪♪
>>> THIS IS PBS "NEWS HOUR
WEEKEND" SUNDAY.
>>> FINALLY, A DEVELOPMENT I
THE FIGHT AGAINST MALARIA.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATIO
SAYS THE DISEASE KILLS A
ESTIMATED 660,000 PEOPLE A YEAR.
BETTER PREVENTION PROGRAMS ARE
BEGINNING TO SHOW POSITIVE
RESULTS AND SOON A NEW DRU
COULD SAVE EVEN MORE LIVES
>> Reporter: MALARIA MIGHT SEE
LIKE A FOREIGN WORD FROM A
TRAVEL ADVISORY, BUT HERE IN MOE
ZAM BEAK, IT'S A DEADLY REALITY.
IN ALMOST ANY HOSPITAL IN RURA
AFRICA, YOU'LL SEE THE IMPACT OF
AN ILLNESS THAT HITS CHILDRE
THE WORST.
KILLING THE MOSQUITOS THAT CARRY
IT CAN HELP TO FIGHT THE DISEASE
BUT NOT BEAT IT.
A NEW VACCINE IS VITAL T
ERADICATE AN ILLNESS THAT KILL
ONE PERSON EVERY MINUTE.
>> YOU HAVE THE PEAK OF MALARI
SEASON
ONE WILL BE IN A COMA.
ANOTHER WILL BE PAPER WHIT
COLOR.
ANOTHER ONE WILL BE CONVULSING
THERE MAY BE A THIRD, A FOURTH
WHO HAS SUCH A HIGH FEVER YO
COULD BOIL WATER ON THEI
FOREHEAD
AS A HEALTH CARE WORKER, YOU
HAVE SECONDS TO DECIDE WHO HAS A
CHANCE TO LIVE
>> Reporter: THIS VACCINE MIGH
HELP
IT'S BEEN TESTED ON THOUSANDS OF
CHILDREN
NOT A CURE, BUT A BIG STEP
AFTER DECADES OF DEVELOPMENT B
GLAXO SMITH KLEIN MIGHT BE
AVAILABLE IN A YEAR'S TIME
>> IT'S A GREAT BREAKTHROUGH I
SCIENCE, BUT IT MIGHT TAKE A
WHILE TO REACH THE CHILDREN WH
NEED IT.
>> Reporter: THE MALARIA
CARRYING MOSQUITO IS A
FORMIDABLE FOE IN THE POORES
COUNTRIES.
ALTHOUGH THE VACCINE MAKERS SA
IT WON'T BE SOLD FOR PROFIT, ONE
QUESTION FOR DOCTORS IN AFRICA
HOSPITALS IS HOW MUCH IT WIL
COST
♪♪
>>> JOIN US FOR THE NEWS HOU
TOMORROW ON AIR AND ONLINE
WE'LL BRING YOU NEWS O
EDUCATION IN PAKISTAN AND TH
LATEST ON EFFORTS TO END THI
SHUTDOWN AND AVOID A DEFAULT O
GOVERNMENT DEBT.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION O
PBS "NEWS HOUR WEEKEND."
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
-- Captions by VITAC -
www.vitac.co
♪♪